The place: Altdorf, in the Swiss canton of Uri. The year is 1307, at 
which time Switzerland is under rule by the Emperor Albert of Habsburg. 
His local governor -- the vogt -- is the bullying Hermann Gessler, who 
has placed his hat atop a wooden pole in the centre of the town square; 
everybody who passes through the square must bow to this hated symbol of 
imperial might.

You have come from your cottage high in the mountains, accompanied by 
your younger son, to purchase provisions. You are a proud and 
independent man, a hunter and guide, renowned both for your skill as an 
archer and, perhaps unwisely (for his soldiers are everywhere), for 
failing to hide your dislike of the vogt.

It's market-day: the town is packed with people from the surrounding 
villages and settlements.

William Tell
A simple Inform example
by Roger Firth and Sonja Kesserich.
Release 3 / Serial number 040804 / Inform v6.30 Library 6/11 SD

A street in Altdorf
The narrow street runs north towards the town square. Local folk are 
pouring into the town through the gate to the south, shouting greetings, 
offering produce for sale, exchanging news, enquiring with exaggerated 
disbelief about the prices of the goods displayed by merchants whose 
stalls make progress even more difficult.

"Stay close to me, son," you say, "or you'll get lost among all these 
people."

>EXAMINE YOUR SON
A quiet, blond lad of eight summers, he's fast learning the ways of 
mountain folk.

>GO NORTH

Further along the street
People are still pushing and shoving their way from the southern gate 
towards the town square, just a little further north. You recognise the 
owner of a fruit and vegetable stall.

Helga pauses from sorting potatoes to give you a cheery wave.

"Hello, Wilhelm, it's a fine day for trade! Is this young Walter? My, 
how he's grown. Here's an apple for him -- tell him to mind that scabby 
part, but the rest's good enough. How's Frau Tell? Give her my best 
wishes."

>INVENTORY
You are carrying:
  an apple
  a quiver (being worn)
  three arrows
  a bow

>TALK TO HELGA
You warmly thank Helga for the apple.

[Your score has just gone up by one point.]

>GIVE THE APPLE TO WALTER
"Thank you, Papa."

[Your score has just gone up by one point.]

>NORTH

South side of the square
The narrow street to the south has opened onto the town square, and 
resumes at the far side of this cobbled meeting place. To continue along 
the street towards your destination -- Johansson's tannery -- you must 
walk north across the square, in the middle of which you see Gessler's 
hat set on that loathsome pole. If you go on, there's no way you can 
avoid passing it. Imperial soldiers jostle rudely through the throng, 
pushing, kicking and swearing loudly.

>EXAMINE THE SOLDIERS
They're uncouth, violent men, not from around here.

>EXAMINE HAT
You're too far away at the moment.

>N
Middle of the square
There is less of a crush in the middle of the square; most people prefer 
to keep as far away as possible from the pole which towers here, topped 
with that absurd ceremonial hat. A group of soldiers stands nearby, 
watching everyone who passes.

>X HAT
The pole, the trunk of a small pine some few inches in diameter, stands 
about nine or ten feet high. Set carefully on top is Gessler's ludicrous 
black and red leather hat, with a widely curving brim and a cluster of 
dyed goose feathers.

>N
A soldier bars your way.

"Oi, you, lofty; forgot yer manners, didn't you? How's about a nice 
salute for the vogt's hat?"


>N

"I know you, Tell, yer a troublemaker, ain't you? Well, we don't want no 
bovver here, so just be a good boy and salute the friggin' hat. Do it 
now: I ain't gonna ask you again..."

>N

"OK, Herr Tell, now you're in real trouble. I asked you nice, but you 
was too proud and too stupid. I think it's time that the vogt had a 
little word with you."

And with that the soldiers seize you and Walter and, while the sergeant 
hurries off to fetch Gessler, the rest drag you roughly towards the old 
lime tree growing in the marketplace.


Marketplace near the square

Altdorf's marketplace, close by the town square, has been hastily 
cleared of stalls. A troop of soldiers has pushed back the crowd to 
leave a clear space in front of the lime tree, which has been growing 
here for as long as anybody can remember. Usually it provides shade for 
the old men of the town, who gather below to gossip, watch the girls, 
and play cards. Today, though, it stands alone... apart, that is, from 
Walter, who has been lashed to the trunk. About forty yards away, you 
are restrained by two of the vogt's men.

Gessler is watching from a safe distance, a sneer on his face.

"It appears that you need to be taught a lesson, fool. Nobody shall pass 
through the square without paying homage to His Imperial Highness 
Albert; nobody, hear me? I could have you beheaded for treason, but I'm 
going to be lenient. If you should be so foolish again, you can expect 
no mercy, but this time, I'll let you go free... just as soon as you 
demonstrate your archery skills by hitting this apple from where you 
stand. That shouldn't prove too difficult; here, sergeant, catch. 
Balance it on the little bastard's head."


>X GESSLER
Short, stout but with a thin, mean face, Gessler relishes the power he 
holds over the local community.

>X WALTER
He stares at you, trying to appear brave and remain still. His arms are 
pulled back and tied behind the trunk, and the apple nestles amid his 
blond hair.

>X APPLE
At this distance you can barely see it.

>SHOOT THE APPLE
Slowly and steadily, you place an arrow in the bow, draw back the 
string, and take aim with more care than ever in your life. Holding your 
breath, unblinking, fearful, you release the arrow. It flies across the 
square towards your son, and drives the apple against the trunk of the 
tree. The crowd erupts with joy; Gessler looks distinctly disappointed.

*** You have won ***

In that game you scored 3 out of a possible 3, in 17 turns.

Would you like to RESTART, RESTORE a saved game or QUIT?
> QUIT


